You say very early in the introduction that you wrote this as a kind of defense of the sonnets.
I don't know if that's precise.
You say straight away that the book is a defense in a way of the sonnets and the high value you place on them.
My question is, does Shakespeare need a defense in this day and age?
the lyric in itself this is not my perception alone it's been said many times by many people that the lyric has been considered a form that is not socially representative in the same way that the novel or the drama or even the non-fiction memoir is and the lyric has descended to us from a court culture of the Renaissance or a court culture of the Sabine Farm in Augusta and Rome if you want
And it has never been a broadly populist form, as the novel was with the reading libraries and so forth, and with the bestsellers and so on.
It seems to most people to be a more inaccessible form and one that is more hermetic to the ordinary reader than the latest novel.
You're talking specifically about sonnets.
No, I'm talking just about the lyric in general.
Okay.
And that it doesn't.
The American lyric is a great and flourishing art, but it doesn't seem to have been grafted into the schools at all.
Though the American short story has made it into the schools, some American plays have made it into the schools, but the schools have dropped the English lyric as they've dropped most of English literature, and they have not replaced it, you might say, by an equal grounding in Americans.
literature, and when they do, literature has become more and more sociological as it's mediated to children.
The lyric being the genre of the inner life is paid less attention to than a genre which seems more broadly representative of the social fabric.
So the short answer is it does need a defense.
Does this concern you?
I don't mean to go off into the canonical debates, but nevertheless they're essential, I think.
It doesn't matter what children read in school if what they read was written by real writers, but a lot of the children's literature and young adult literature is fabricated for a certain audience by commercial
people, the way the romance, say, is fabricated for a certain female audience, by people who aren't real writers.
They're writing to formula, out of a commercial desire, and they're writing without even much personal liberty when they adhere to whatever it might be, the spy novel, the techno novel, the romance novel.
And the same is true of children and young adults' literature.
A lot of it is
deliberately confected to please certain constituencies rather than written by people like Sendak, who was a real writer, an imaginative writer.
And to that extent, I feel that in America, imaginative literature as such has been kind of undone by a sort of sociological conflict for the children.
We're at Harvard.
Is Shakespeare a required
thought at so many other places.
I know.
You can actually get it.
Scott Turow told me that he was sitting at a table with, you don't mind my jumping around with questions, by the way, because I am going to write about, I promise, I'll write a poem about the science.
Whatever you want to do.
It's fine.
Thank you.
But I'm planning to use this for a number of things.
But he was sitting at a table where the president of Amherst College was informed that they had just
graduated summa cum laude, an English major who had never taken a course in Shakespeare.
Well, of course, Shakespeare was a very well-educated man, and he had never taken a course in Shakespeare.
And it's not important to become well-educated that a specific thing be read, but it's important that what you read was written by real minds and real writers.
I mean, you could certainly be very well-educated if you read nothing but Russian novels.
You know, if you really sat down and read everything from Tolstoy through Stanislav Lem, you would be a cultivated person, whether you would read Shakespeare or not.
If you sat down and you read all of French literature, from Ruiz Boeuf all the way up through Peggy, I mean, you would again, by reading Racine, Cornet, and Moliere, and Pascal, and Voltaire, and Dietrich Robert, you would be a very well-educated person, Proust, even if you hadn't read Shakespeare.
I mean...
There are many ways of becoming an educated person.
My point is that to purport to be an English major, though, I'm not talking a literature major, but an English major.
Call it something else, if you will.
I would think that an English major, in a way, would not have to be required
to read Shakespeare, but that something in an English major would make him seek out Shakespeare.
It would seem so, wouldn't it?
Yes.
On the other hand, sometimes people are ruined for certain things in high school.
If you've had a teacher who has taken you through Macbeth line by line and has taken eight weeks to do it instead of overnight, which is the way Macbeth should be read, read the play.
It's overnight reading.
Even if you told them the plot first so they
wouldn't have too much trouble following the plot, and I'd say, now go home and read it.
But they do it in such funny ways in high school where it gets so tedious that I could understand somebody thinking in his rebellious and adolescent way, never again Shakespeare, not for a long time, and doing other things.
I just did an interview two hours ago with Margaret Drabble, who's in Boston.
Oh, did you?
Of course, she is about to embark on the next edition.
of the Oxford Companion.
So she actually is making canonical decisions here.
And she says, of course, Sir Walter Raleigh will always be in the canon, even though nobody reads him.
But he has to be there.
And of course now she's thinking about who goes in.
She said she was at a conference, and this high school teacher said it was really moaning because she had to teach Shakespeare.
And she said, you know, the consensus was, here's a teacher who doesn't want it to happen.
What is the student going to get out of this woman who is so angry that she has to teach a course in Shakespeare?
That's not a question, I guess it's just a comment.
Yes, well, after my son had no poetry in kindergarten, first grade, second grade, third grade, fourth grade in private schools here in Boston, Cambridge, I finally said to his fifth grade teacher, do you ever do any poetry with the children?
And she said, oh, if I said we're going to do poetry, they would all just say, ooh.
Of course, that's because she thinks, ooh.
That's right.
Well, it's exactly the same sentence.
So?
154 sonnets with an essay on each one.
An amazing undertaking.
Well, I didn't intend it to be that.
When I started, I was going to write a book on the sonnets.
And I wrote chapter one and it had three sonnets.
I wrote chapter two and it had three sonnets.
Then I realized I was undertaking to write a fifty-one chapter book and that would not do.
And yet I wanted to write about the lesser known poems as well as the best known.
Most of the books on the sonnets are about the fifteen best known sonnets.
But I was interested in each one because it's very interesting when a poet confines himself to a single form and does it over and over and over and over and over.
And you have to find something new to do each time when the outer cage is the same.
And so within the cage, you do very many interesting acrobatic jumps.
And it's such a test of invention to do that.
And I think no one has ever done it better than Shakespeare, including Petrarch or Dante or Monsard.
Well, Keith didn't write that many sonnets, but if you write 154 of them,
You really are put on your mettle to do something interesting inside the same form over and over and over and over, so they won't all sound alike.
So I decided it would really be only fair to Shakespeare's inventiveness, of which he had more than anybody else, to talk about what he does in each one to make it interesting to him as a writer to do it.
And you say that despite all the years that you spent as a critic of poetry, there are still
There are still themes and aspects to the sonnets that elude you.
Is that right?
Yeah, there are ones where I think this is not interesting enough yet as a poem to me.
And maybe there was something of interest to Shakespeare here in writing it that I'm not yet seeing.
Because usually I think he did have something.
jugglings in the air at once.
And when I see only one thing maybe being done, I think, well, maybe I'm just not seeing the other four that are in this sonnet.
I may see five things going on in this sonnet.
If I only see one going on here, it strikes me that I'm probably deficient rather than that Shakespeare is.
And there's no question that there's so many different things mindfully going on?
Oh, yeah.
No question in your mind that he had all these different
planes of activity.
No, because, I mean, I don't say that any more than a composer says, I think I will use a diminished seventh here.
He just writes the music, but it's because he has such a repertoire of possible forking branches that he can take at any given moment of evolution of the work that he has the repertoire of the templates so much in his head that he can take
this fork, and then that fork, and then this fork, and then that fork, and make the thing evolve in an interesting way.
But it's done by instinct, but only after the ingestion of millions of bars of music before you start composing your own, all like Milton going down to Reed for seven years in his father's house after he had finished university to ingest all Hebrew and Latin and Greek.
Milton did this?
He just sat for seven years in his father's house and read.
I'm doing a chapter on readers, people shaped by their reading.
Oh, certainly Milton.
And then Atwood said, not Atwood, this is Drabble, the two Margaret's, has just looked at Milton's daughters, who would have said, they read to him, but could they understand?
It's accurate that they read by rote and probably didn't understand.
And she said she rather doubts it.
I think that they probably, if they didn't understand when they started, they certainly understood by the time they finished.
After all, the vocabulary of Latin poetry is relatively narrow, and if you kept reading Latin to your father, you would eventually begin to know Latin.
And then, of course, one of the daughters took the dictation for Paradise Lost, and she did a pretty decent job on it.
Well, they had an amanuensis for that, too.
Wasn't she the one for that?
His nephew certainly did some of it, and he also had a hired amanuensis.
I mean, you could get from Masson's biography of Milton, would tell you.
William Riley Parker has a biography of Milton, too.
William?
Riley Parker.
Okay.
I understand I'm writing a
a literary column here for about twenty-two newspapers, but general readers, but I'm largely in university towns, and so I can write about a book that discusses a great length of the sonnets, but I'm still writing for general readership.
Explain to me what you would like a general reader to know about Shakespeare's sonnets.
It's the same thing I would like a general reader to know about all poetry.
most poetry has its power over us by what it does not with the theme but with the language in which it enacts the theme that is first of all a poem is not an essay it doesn't have a topic sentence which it then develops it is a constantly it's more like a piece of music it's a constantly evolving form taking new shapes as it goes along
and has a temporal evolution, so that if the poet's mind is at point A when you begin, maybe at point B a quarter of the way through, maybe it'd be at point C, later on it may end up at point X, which isn't quite far away from point A. So that when people read poems as though they were statements, they are missing the true activity of poems, which is, as T.S.
Eliot said, to cast the nerves
in patterns on a screen.
And so it's more like an EKG or an EEG, so that you see the nerves in patterns on a screen, as he put it, Prufrock.
And if you think of a poem as a mobile, what Stevens called it, a mobile flickering between is and was, you won't see it as a static remark.
That's one thing.
The second thing is that the themes of lyric
are really quite few and repeated through the ages.
What is the highest good?
Who is the happy man?
I love you, do you love me?
I am away from you and I am sad.
Somebody has died and I feel bad.
These are the static themes, the elegy, the love poem, the poem of prayer, the poem of praise, the poem of thanksgiving, the poem of metaphysical doubt,
But there really aren't that many of these basic genres, and yet poets do them over and over and over and over, so that at least after your first run-through when you're young, you recognize that this is yet another poem saying X is dead, and I'm sorry.
But the interesting thing is how it's being said this time, by contrast to how it was said the last time, and the originality lies in how it's said
and why it's being said that way, rather than in what is said.
That's excellent.
I had two thoughts there.
You have two thoughts and then you lose them both.
Do you despair?
I mean, are there poets today that you admire?
Oh, and how?
Yes.
Are you despairable?
That is to say, it seems to me that pattern making is never going to go out of style.
It's part of our evolutionary deposit.
And people are fascinated by patterns and by pattern making, whether they see patterns in nature like fractals, or whether they make patterns themselves in dances, or in music, or in words, or in anything.
I mean, you can't not have a pattern.
All architecture has a pattern.
The patterns change, and if you look at the Bilbao, the Gary Bilbao, it certainly doesn't look like what the 19th century would have put up as a museum, but the shapes as they echo each other, the new Guggenheim and Bilbao that Gary just did, sorry.
It's a recognizable collection of congruent shapes that relate to each other.
It's a pattern, but it's not the boxy pattern of the 19th century art museum with its pediment and its columns.
The reinvention of patterns, the recombination of patterns, all the combinatorial and permutational patterns that people make and do seem to me absolutely evolutionarily advantageous and therefore likely to remain.
And so the people who are hardwired for words will do verbal patterning.
People who are hardwired for sound will do musical patterning.
People who are hardwired for volume will do architectural patterning.
People who are hardwired for kinesthetic movement will do ballet or something, but I don't fear for the disappearance of any of these patterning forms.
You don't.
And so you don't enter this debate, which seems to me is getting less and less interesting as we go along about the future of the printed book as opposed to the computer.
No, new art forms may spring up.
I mean, video art.
And you have a CD in this book, incidentally.
I do, yes.
Just because poems are meant to be heard as well as seen.
But that's a feature that wasn't really possible with a printed book a few years ago.
No.
Or you might have been able to get a big 33 RPM record or something like that.
Yes, that's true.
But that really wouldn't have worked.
Well, actually a 33, a third record was of John Ashbery reading Self-Portrait of a Convict's Mirror.
It was included in a limited edition, beautiful fine press thing of self-portrait of the Convict's mirror.
It was the Aryan Press in San Francisco that did it.
I did the liner notes for the record.
That's why I read it.
That is interesting.
How long ago might that have been?
I'll check it out.
It's at least fifteen years ago.
Yeah, so you see all these things that happened before.
You're talking about interactive books.
Well, a pop-up book is an interactive book, and they've been around for five hundred years.
That's right.
And they flip through books and make the movement happen.
There's little pictures in the corner.
That's a very old one, too.
Yeah, it really is.
I was just at the Gutenberg Museum at Mines.
Oh, lucky you.
I've never been there.
And I really didn't plan to go there.
I was in Frankfurt to see the new… Oh, the book fair?
No, I went ahead of the book fair to see the new library.
I'm writing about libraries.
This is the book I'm working on.
I've been there, yes.
Very interesting.
And the new British Library?
I've been there.
And the new one in Frankfort.
And there was just the new one in Stockholm, which was blasted out of the granite.
Really?
Well, it's the old one, but it still exists, but they blasted out of the granite.
They went down five levels, a hundred thousand cubic yards
Of course that's what we did here with the Piercy Library.
That's the way to do it.
Cornell just did the same thing.
They went down.
But I went to Frankfurt, which was there.
But the various, you see, things, you know, that everything isn't, like you're pointing out, everything isn't revolutionary.
There have been textures and nuances from the past.
I think that the art sometimes moved from place to place.
I mean, suddenly there was an explosion with Garcia Marquez and Cortázar and so forth in South America of the novel after a period of torpidity, more or less.
Borges really began it and went on from there.
Suddenly you have an exfoliation.
It's astonishing the way you had with modernist American poetry, with Eliot Brown, Stevens, Frost Williams, whereas in England suddenly poetry had Auden and almost nobody else.
Then later Larkin, suddenly there's an exfoliation in Northern Ireland, partly because there's an urgency there to have things said.
So this rabble was saying today, Scotland all of a sudden.
Scotland all of a sudden, yes.
Like crazy.
That's right.
She said, I really have to pay attention to Scotland now.
Exactly.
But it's not that there are torpid moments, and I mean we can very well have a torpid moment in this art or that art here too.
But there's a beautiful poem by Walt Whitman called Song of the Exposition, where he's entreating the muse to come to America.
And he says, close up, please, those immensely overpaid accounts of Ionia and Greece.
And then he announced at the end about the muse, she's here, installed him in the kitchenware.
And so she's left Parnassus and Olympus, and she's here, installed him in the kitchenware.
And that was Whitman declaring there would be an American literature.
He was right, there was.
Tell me if you mind talking a little bit about your biography, how you tend to be, how you came to be so involved in poetry, how you became a critic.
And let me ask another question.
Do you mind if I shoot a couple pictures of you?
Just the way you're sitting, the way you're gesturing.
I do have some papers that say color pictures, if you don't mind.
Go ahead and talk.
Can I take a look at my face?
Oh, you look lovely.
Trust me.
My wife edits every picture I send out.
Oh, that's a nice little one, isn't it?
This is contacts.
This is really good.
Is it a digital camera?
No.
They're no good.
They're no good?
No good.
We were talking about my geography.
I mean, I could say my parents were both interested in .
.
Don't worry about me.
I'm going to shoot some available light, which I love the light, and then maybe a couple of flashes.
So you're just talking.
I love the way your hands are moving, actually, so don't .
.
Well, my mother was interested in poetry.
My father taught Romance languages, and he taught us poetry, and he gave us poems to read in Spanish, French, and Italian.
And I was also brought up a Roman Catholic, and we sang Latin hymns a lot, and we sang the Latin liturgy at the school I was at.
And where was this?
Here in Boston.
Oh, so you're a native?
I'm a native, yes.
Really?
Yes, I grew up in Jamaica Plain.
I didn't know that.
My father taught at English high school, and my mother had been a primary school teacher, but she couldn't teach after she was married because they forbade married women to teach in those days because she would be taking bread out of her breadwinner's mouth.
So my mother, after 14 years, lost her job of teaching when she married, which was very...
But my mother read a lot of poetry and knew a lot of poetry by Howard.
But it didn't take on my two siblings, but it took on me.
It's partly nature and partly nurture, I guess.
Are you older siblings?
I have an older sister and a younger brother.
And so you went to college, planning to be a teacher?
Did you plan to be a poet, or did you plan to be a critic?
Well, I wrote poetry for years, but I didn't know why my poetry just satisfied me.
Later, of course, I mean, I could only know it later, that my mind is really analytical rather than imaginative.
But, I mean, my poems were all, you might say, technically correct, and they all had something to say, but I knew there was something wrong.
And they were more the poetry of statements than the poetry of waywardness.
I mean, being led by the imagination is wayward.
And being led by thought is expository.
But I really had never written anything that satisfied me until I did my PhD dissertation.
And then for the first time I found that was right.
And what was the subject?
The dissertation was on Yeats.
And I wanted to write on the poems, but I knew I was too young and that he had experiences that were so far beyond my own and really inconceivable to me.
As a young girl.
Now, this is a Ph.D.
candidate.
Yes.
You were too young.
Well, I wrote the chapter, I wrote the paper that became the central chapter of the dissertation when I was 23.
And when you're writing on stuff that somebody's written between 60 and 70, you know there's a gap in experience that's almost too great to be bridged.
But just, I'm thinking now of Sendak, for instance, who has a death mask.
And you said you have a life mask.
Yes.
He says he gets up every day and he strokes this face and he says, how did this boy of 22 know so much?
Well, he had six people die on him, of course, Keith did.
I mean, his mother, his father, his grandmother, his grandfather, his little brother, Edward, who died at two and a half, and his brother, Tom, who died at 18.
And if you have that sort of devastation hit you, I think you know a lot more about life than I knew when I was 23.
So, to go back to your statement about Milton, who after college, immersing himself, you said seven years?
So it truly is a commencement then, isn't it?
Yes, yes.
So tell me a little bit about, you said you weren't ready then, what did you do to prepare yourself after that?
Well, I lived, among other things.
I didn't feel ready to write on Shakespeare, though I had known these poems since I was fifteen, until I was in my late fifties.
And I used to amuse my colleagues at BU by going around and wringing my hands, saying, I wish I could teach Shakespeare.
And they would say, Helen, you know perfectly right if you teach Shakespeare whenever you want.
I said, no, no, no.
That's not what I mean.
Yes.
Finally, I'm ready to teach Shakespeare.
Now, why is it that they could teach Shakespeare and that you couldn't?
Undoubtedly, you could teach it.
But you're telling me something in a different way.
I didn't understand it well enough in my own mind to teach it yet.
Because, I mean, I could see that these poems were wonderful, but I didn't know why yet.
And we're strictly talking about the sonnets now, and not the plays.
No, I've never taught the plays.
And why is that?
It's poetry.
Because I'm not worthy.
Oh, stop!
I don't understand.
I've never devoted enough time to them.
I mean, you would have to devote many, many years even to begin to understand those plays, and to understand the mind out of which they came.
I was trying to understand Shakespeare's mind.
basically in his thirties.
And that's different from understanding his mind in his fifties, you know.
And this is something we really haven't discussed.
Do you accept that the sonnets were kind of five-finger exercises for him?
Oh, they're by no means five-finger exercises.
I mean, he had already, if we were to judge by at least some of the correspondence, he had already written Henry IV, Part I. He had already written The Merchant of Venice, probably.
He had already written certainly Les Labor's Lost and Romeo and Juliet and the early history plays.
So these are by no means by an apprentice.
These are by somebody who is already writing the great plays.
But they weren't meant to really be read by anybody, do you think?
Do you agree with that?
I don't think any poems are meant to be read by anybody.
That is to say, any poems are meant to be read by anybody.
That is to say, that's not the reason for which poems are written.
They're written because the person is compelled to write by whatever genius makes you compelled to do anything.
And then they are written to satisfy yourself until they click and everything's in its place.
You're not satisfied.
You tinker, as you can tell from the revisions poets do, tinker and tinker and tinker.
I was just showing my students the draft of The Eve of St.
Agnes, which we have over here in the Houghton Library.
You wouldn't believe the amount of tinkering Keith has done, but make it right.
So until it's right, it's only right when you are satisfied with it.
It's not for some other people out there.
It's to make the right thing.
What do you feel, and if you don't mind my jumping around, because you have this unbelievable collection of Keats material at the Houghton Library, do you go over there often and handle these?
Well, you don't have to handle them.
In the first place, there's a facsimile of all the poetic manuscripts.
I wouldn't have to handle a manuscript unless it were necessary, first of all, because they're so
And it isn't necessary.
I've never handled the Keats manuscripts myself, although I wrote on Keats and did the introduction for the facsimile edition.
But you have to really have a reason to handle those real things.
If you're an editor, you would have to handle them.
I take them out.
for the students when I teach Keats, in order to show them the first editions, and to show them we had Keats's inscribed edition of his poems, inscribed to Fanny Braun, this JK to FB, over there yesterday.
We had all the first editions.
We had George Eliot's copy of Keats' poems, Matthew Arnold's copy of Keats' poems, just so they could see association copies.
I did have some of the manuscripts out.
I had the manuscript on first looking into Chapman's homework, and I had one of his letters so he could see the crossed letters when they wrote this direction.
What students are these?
He's my freshman.
Really?
I'm teaching a freshman seminar in Keats, yeah.
So special collections really are useful.
Oh, they're encouraging us always to bring our students over.
I always bring my students there, the seminars.
I mean, it's groups that are small enough to bring.
And what does access or exposure to this material, do you think, give a student?
Well, first of all, it gives them the vocab to a tiny extent, the limited vocabulary of bibliographical description.
So I show them the facsimiles.
I tell them this is a diplomatic transcript.
So everything is there on the printed page that is there on the manuscript crossed out and so forth.
They learn what a transcript is.
They learn what a first edition, a 19th century first edition might look like.
I took out Chapman's Homer in a Renaissance edition so that Keats would have seen the prestige associated in those great Renaissance books with the frontispices and the commentatory verses and the panegyrics.
epigraphs, so they see the way books used to be done.
They could see the rapidity with which Keats wrote his letters just dashed off like this and then dashed all across.
They could see the rapidity of his mind.
They're brilliant letters, though.
Yes, they could see.
The mind is still working even at speed.
All the time, high speed, which is useful for them to know about the rapidity and fluidity of genius.
I showed them his Shakespeare, which we have in little volumes.
Keats and Shakespeare.
I'd faint if I handled that anyway.
Well, it is to faint.
It's Dr. Johnson's edition of Shakespeare.
And after each play, Dr. Johnson has a little evaluative judgment of the play.
And some of them drive Keith's mad, and he X's them out with big X's or scribbles over them.
And then he writes down blockhead, or man dressed in a little brief authority, or proud, proud, proud, or is criticism a true thing?
these adaptations?
I don't know.
Are they worth it?
They're not enough of them in the Shakespeare.
But what is interesting, they are now, I've noticed they've just made photocopies.
But the lines that Keats marked, I think, are intensely interesting.
As when I saw his Paradise Lost in the Keats House in Hampstead, his underlinings are of two sorts.
He underlines everything in Genesis about growth, beauty, generations, sprouting,
You know, greenness and fullness and gourds, the gourds from the Otu Anand come from Genesis.
And then the other thing he underlines is the long prophecy of all the ills, the angel's prophecy to Adam, Adam sees in the trance, all the ills that humanity will be heir to on account of the fall.
He underlines all this stuff about Lazar houses and sickness and mortality.
So the two poles that keeps the imagination, the generative pole and the melancholy pole, are all there in his underlining Milton.
That's wonderful.
You are absolutely excited by this.
It doesn't bore you at all.
Oh, no, no.
It has lost none of its magic for you.
No, no, no.
No, I live, but the only thing it loses... You live for what?
I live through language.
And the thing is, the great artists of language never lose their charm, whether it's Milton or Keith or anybody else.
There's also a sense that you have had that taste of self-worth through language that Copkin says is as distinctive as alam on the tongue.
And you know what the mild taste is.
You know what the Keith's taste is.
And so another thirst that needs to be slaked is a new taste, which is why I read contemporary poetry, because it's the only way you can have the same sensation of newness that you first had when you came across Keith's art.
or anybody else, or Hopkinson, that, oh, I think cloning oneself in one's style is what poets are meant to do.
So that you say, oh, yes, that's Tennyson, that's Keats, that's Milton, that you know them from their style.
That's who they are.
Do you agree that each generation, you know, for instance, we say that each generation should have a new Shakespeare or a new Dante?
We should be so lucky.
Well, I mean, we would be very lucky if we had a new Shakespeare or a new Dante.
I think that there is a sense in which one doesn't share the experience.
I don't now share the experience of the 20-year-olds.
I think I knew very well the poets would come before me.
I knew very well the poets of, say, Lowell's generation.
Lowell was, I guess, 17 years older than I.
That Lowell, Berryman, Plath generation, which ranged from people somewhat older than I to people my own age, like Sylvia Plath.
That generation is now dying.
They're a little older than I. Again, the post-World War II people, Ginsburg has died, Merrill has died, and there are others around, Ammons, Ashbery, Merwin, but they are all 17 now, rich.
The generation after that of the 40-year-olds, 47-year-olds, 45-year-olds, I feel I know, too.
But the generation of the 25-year-olds, I think, may be going to be too remote for me in experience.
I don't know.
They've grown up in a different culture, mediated a lot more by television and popular culture, perhaps, that I don't share.
I mean, it's hard to... You say, Compass is pretty much your own lifetime, and then going back, but then, of course, historically,
Now, it's kind of a paradox.
You were hesitant to engage Shakespeare, but you didn't hesitate to engage Keats.
Does that make Keats any less formidable?
No, I hadn't known Keats since I was twelve, and I didn't write my book about it until 1985, so it was about, you know, whatever, I don't know how long that is, about forty years before I wrote on Keats.
I mean, I was twelve in 1945 when the war ended.
I certainly first read Keats when I was twelve, and I wrote, the book I wrote about him, I think it was published maybe eighty-five.
Wonderful book, by the way.
Thank you.
I remember the fact that I was present at the National Book Critics Circle when you received your wonderful line, I think, because you were getting married and your teacher said, well, Helen, I know it's going to be difficult, but at least read a sonnet every day.
That's right.
It was Roseman, too, yes.
I've repeated it to other students.
But there is a kind of lifeline of, I don't mean just language, but shaped into form.
I mean, each poem has a shape of its own, an idiosyncratic shape that impresses itself strongly, as a piece of music does too, as a certain quartet night or a certain leader cycle or something.
And it's an irremovable shape.
You can't forget it.
It's just there.
It's imprinted.
And so it's not just language, because if you like just language, you would be happy with, say, a novel just as much, this wonderful language and novel.
But I like shapes.
Now, who was the teacher that said, read something every day, even if it's just a sonnet?
She was a teacher at Connecticut College.
Did you spell her name?
R-O-S-E-M-O-N-D-T-U-V-E.
She was a visiting professor here one year when I was in graduate school, so I got to know her.
I hate to waste time going over the Vita, but is there something that you could give me at some point before?
I'll be glad.
I asked that question for a purpose, not just to get the teacher's name, but
But did you follow this teacher's advice?
Do you read poetry every day?
No, I don't read poetry every day.
Mostly I'm reading, you know, whatever, the opera omnia of the people that we are hoping to hire or something like that.
As you get older in this profession, more and more of your reading turns out to be professional reading, sometimes for juries, sometimes for prizes, sometimes for searches.
Sometimes you read the works of your students, dissertation students, so that you're reading an awful lot of prose.
I read poetry as much as I can.
Do you read certain poems over and over again?
Oh, yeah.
I never tired.
What would immediately spring to mind?
Well, I mean, I never tire of reading Stevens, who is my favorite poet, and in whom I always find new things.
I mean, I need Stevens to interpret myself to me, and there's always in Stevens really wonderful things that you haven't seen in the last decade.
It's true of every great poet that each decade, poems that you have completely slighted in the preceding decades,
suddenly come up in letters of gold and you thought how could I have missed that before but there's a wonderful poem that I just read of Stevens that I had completely never written about completely ignored called The Green Plant and it's about getting old and it's once upon a time you lived in a red and green forest it is red and green the primary colors red for the sun and green for the vegetation your world is red and green now it is it then went down to being
maroon and olive.
And now you're not even living in the maroon and olive world anymore.
You are living in what he calls the legend of the maroon and olive forest.
So it's so far back, even the maroon and olive forest is so far back that it has now become legendary.
So you're really far gone.
And you really feel that everything is faded down now to almost colorlessness.
Now that you're even so far away from those colors that you thought were so dreary, maroon and olive, by comparison to red and green, but now you have only the dim memory of those.
And suddenly, though, he says, there's a green plant growing outside the window, and it doesn't care anything about you.
And, you know, it's the young growing up as you're going down into your grayness after your maroon and oliveness after your red and greenness.
It's almost like the theme of the 73 sonnet.
Yes, yes.
But it's barbaric, the green plant that's growing up.
And it has nothing to do with it.
It's very, very cool in a way, isn't it?
It is.
It's a wonderful, harsh poem of the eternal recrudescence of the young and their energy.
If you had a chance, that was a dumb question, but I've asked it to some people, but if you could spend an hour with Shakespeare, what questions would you, what questions burn most, I guess to put it in a less
in a silly way, what baffles you most about the person that he could answer directly for you?
Why?
He stopped writing.
He was a compulsive and copious writer.
He was trading out two or three plays a year, except in the years when they closed the theaters for the plagues.
There's a very mysterious ending to Shakespeare's life in which, after having left
the dull backwater that it was and spent all his time in London with Ben Johnson and everybody else.
He knows that he's not doing it right anymore because he says he has prospero saying he'll drown his brooks and break his death.
He knows that something is going to prevent his writing in the future, and that he won't be writing anymore, and that he'd better go home where somehow there'll be people to take care of him.
Now, I don't know why that was, but I don't think he would ever have willingly left London unless there was something very wrong.
And he did live for at least another seven years, wasn't he?
Yes, he did.
was happening in those years, and why a compulsive writer should form False Island, and how he knew he wasn't going to write anymore, and why he went home out of the city where he had spent all his adult life.
I don't know.
I asked that same question to Robert Giroux, the publisher, Elizabeth Bishop.
He said instantly, I'd like to know why, as a publisher, he never dared to publish his place.
Why was it so irrelevant to him?
I know, but he certainly knew he was brilliant.
He must have known he was brilliant.
I mean, Ben Johnson published his works.
It was later, though.
They called them works.
Yes, but that was later.
after Shakespeare died.
I mean, it was not common to do that.
Johnson had a very strong affinity with Latin writers and liked the folios of Virgil and Hallmark and so on that he had seen and thought of himself in the line.
That's why he wrote Sejanus and Catiline.
He thought of himself as a classical author.
Shakespeare never thought of himself as Sejanus or Capiline, really.
He was a country kid, do you think, in his real life?
He was a vernacular.
He's like Dante.
He wanted the vernacular.
He loved the vernacular.
And did not hark back, in a way, to the... He borrowed his stories occasionally from Plutarch, but a lot of his stories were just borrowed from Boccaccio or Giraldo Sinti or something.
He liked the contemporary or the medieval, or he didn't feel obliged to go back to the classical.
Of course, he wasn't formally educated, which they don't.
Neither was Ben Johnson, though.
They held against him.
Yes, of course.
This is probably why they can't accept that Shakespeare is Shakespeare, you know.
Well, often the autodidact, as we all know, is the best educated of all.
It seems.
Yeah.
Like Blake.
I asked Schoenbaum that question, too, and he said he would like to get at the wellsprings of creativity.
He said that's what fascinated him most was, you know, where did this stuff come from?
And of course, that you're never going to hear.
Do you think there are any secrets, not secrets, but any aspects of his experience that are still reachable for us, the things, either factual things, the things about his writing,
Oh, I certainly know.
I think there are always new discoveries to be made about writing, because each age brings new intellectual tools, whether it's bringing Freud and Marx to texts, like Shakespeare, that had not had Freud and Marx, hadn't been looked through through those lenses before.
I don't say that everything discovered through those lenses is true, but there are new lenses with which to look.
And linguistics can't offer us enough that's been done with linguistics and literature at all.
And certainly there are always comparisons that are very fruitful, but the people haven't yet gotten around to making.
I mean, it would be very fruitful to compare, say, Shakespeare and perhaps trying to think who might be the best.
somebody who has the same human power, say, Chekhov, maybe that's been done.
But you can't be a Shakespeare with Chekhov in the early 19th century, because Chekhov isn't there yet.
But once Chekhov comes, he makes you see things.
I think he's the person most like Shakespeare among all the dramatists, because he's the only unjudging one like Shakespeare.
And, uh, I mean, he sympathizes with everybody, sort of.
And, um,
But you could see new things in Shakespeare through the lens of Chekhov that you couldn't have seen in Shakespeare before Chekhov was born.
It's like that.
It always evolves.
Probably you see new things in Mozart through Stravinsky that one couldn't have seen in Mozart until Stravinsky came along and used certain aspects of him.
I like that.
Briefly, I am interested in this whole canon debate, and I was...
I'm surprised, not surprised, but I read with great interest your review of Denby's book.
What was it about that book that so disturbed you?
Partly that you hadn't learned anything the second time around, and you hadn't learned anything the first time around either.
I mean, that seemed so depressing.
It was very depressing.
that he hadn't learned anything that he thought he had.
I guess it's depressing for a teacher to see how obtuse people can be, even though they're grown up, you know?
And they think for yourself congratulatory about how much they're learning, but you can see reading him that he really hadn't learned anything.
What was he missing in your view?
He was missing the capacity to lose himself in the work of art, so that if he reads King Lear he has to talk about him and his mother.
not what King Lear is there for.
King Lear is there for you to live with King Lear and Garnel and Regan and Gloucester and Edmund and Edmund and Kent and the Fool for a while, and to see what is, what was in it for Shakespeare to write that play.
If all you could do with King Lear is saying, I wasn't that bad to my mother, you haven't lived within the play sufficiently.
It's not a laugh, it is not.
Do you find this whole debate about the relevance of the canon, the Western canon in decline, a really uninteresting subject?
Do you think it's a little overplayed, or is there a legitimate concern, that political... Well, things go in and out of the canon.
I mean... That's a word that hardly was ever used in my day.
Of course not.
It's misleading, because as everyone has pointed out, it comes to the Biblical canon, which was closed by ecclesiastical fiat.
Whereas the literary canon, in the first place, nobody has the authority to close it, and secondly, it's always evolving and changing.
Somebody can do a lot for an author by paying a lot of attention to him, as when, for instance, Eliot paid all that attention to Dante.
Dante had not been a very congenial subject to the English literary tradition because he was a Roman Catholic, and Protestantism kind of tended to junk Roman Catholic literature.
I mean, there are ways that things go in and out of the canon or the political like that or, you know, whatever.
And then Eliot decides to pay all his attention to Dante.
That's another very good historical instance of a great work being more or less shelved in England.
It was never shelved in Italy, of course, but it was more or less shelved in England, although Chaucer loved Dante, of course, but Chaucer was before the Reformation.
Yes, and then after the Reformation,
There is a prejudice against reading works of Catholicism of Catholic authors, and just as you might say, there was an attempt by the Roman Catholic Church through the Index of Forbidden Books to proscribe the reading of Voltaire, Diogo Pascal, so everybody was on the index because they were Enlightenment rationalists, or else they were Protestant chancenists or whatever, but
There are always these extra-literary reasons that people are dropped from school curricula, are included in school curricula.
Fox's Book of Martyrs was practically required reading for everybody in 16th century England, and who reads it now?
It's not in canon, though it's a worthy book.
Paul LeClaire, when he was a student at Holy Cross, he's the president of the New York Public Library and a scholar, and he said he had to
They formally request permission from the Bishop of Worcester to read Voltaire.
Exactly.
And they gave him permission.
And the teacher, the Jesuit priest, had to get permission to teach it to him.
I mean, think about that.
Well, I was in Catholic schools myself, so it's one of the reasons why I have no talk with any ideology.
And that's why I didn't major in English in college, I majored in chemistry.
You're kidding.
I didn't like the way they taught literature for those reasons, so I simply moved over tonight.
My parents wouldn't let me go to anybody's house, so I simply did chemistry, and I had a Fulbright in math, and then I did my Ph.D.
in English.
When I was free to do as I pleased, I came here and did my Ph.D.
That paycheck in a way.
He went to law school because his father demanded it, and then finally when his father died, and now he said, I can do what I want to do.
Well, that's the way one becomes oneself, of course.
I think we've got about five minutes, and I love the idea that there are all these cryptographic elements tucked into the sonnets.
There aren't that many.
I mean, it's true that the Renaissance liked games, and there are many Renaissance poems that play various
Sometimes they do acrostics.
Sometimes, as in George Herbert, they do anagrams.
He does an anagram, George Herbert does, on Mary and army.
He turns the letters over the word Mary, the name Mary, into the word army, and says, How well her name and army doth present, in whom the Lord of hosts doth pitch his tent.
And he makes up something clever like that.
Herbert also wrote a little poem that has an axiom going down diagonally.
Our life is hid with Christ in God.
One word in each line, slanting down.
And so you read it downwards like that and say, I like it in Christ with God.
And he doesn't, he's not trying to fool you or anything.
He puts the quote from, he puts the reference to Colossians at the head of the poem and shows you, and italicizes the words.
But it's, yes, I mean, they like these games.
It's a form of game playing, but no poem is made good by game playing.
I mean, it's only something
But someone like Shakespeare, who already is an accomplished writer, puts an obstacle in his own path to make it more fun.
You know, it's hurdles in racing.
You point out he's fanciful, but not frivolous, and I think that's a very, very important thing.
And then a final question, you know, one of the reasons you hear often for not teaching something in a
Is relevance important to you?
Not to art.
I mean, art.
In the first place, art creates its own relevance, in the sense that it may not seem relevant to people.
People were very shocked when Gauguin went off and started painting in those flat, muddy colors.
Right in the middle of Impressionism, when everyone was painting pink and blue,
and then he goes and does these flat, muddy paintings of what they think of as ugly women, and people don't understand why he's left Paris and why he's doing his painting and has gone primitive and whatever, and then he creates his own relevance.
And now, you know, everybody flocks to see the... Great.
Terrific quote, by the way, to wrap up on it.
Would you inscribe my copy?
I'd love to.
I know you have a speech.
I'd like it.
Industrial picture, you know?
So why did you like it so much?
or I came across it in the getty and I just froze because there's two signs of Shakespeare's about how desire will outstrip even the fastest horse and there it is then should I spur though mounted on the wind in winged speed no motion shall I know then can no horse with my desire keep pace and so he gives his horse leave to go and he runs up at the speed of desire so this is Petrarch that says bus desire leads me on so it just
I just was rooted to the spot when I saw it in the guinea.
It never occurred to me even slightly that it was inappropriate.
No marketing department.
Even the Belknap Press, though, which is supposed to be here.
And then they had to apologize to me because they tipped the title page in wrong.
It's not supposed to be glued to the end paper.
It's supposed to be glued to the next signature.
But in fact, it is glued to the end paper.
The title page precedes the half title, that is.
Yes, it's all wrong.
So they said the next printing, I'll do it right.
Yeah, it makes a pretty nice, uh, getting my card.
I'll leave you my card by the way.
Do you need an email at all?
No, I, it's an invention of the devil.
I want it, I'm done.
Drabble said she has it, but she's afraid of it.
I'm sorry.